Recording 1

Q: My dog has itchy skin and we've tried multiple elimination diets through skin specialists without success. What else can we try?

A: Without knowing what the cause of itching is, we need to start from the very beginning and work out which direction the results go. The first option that we're going to do is to put the dog on a completely hypoallergenic diet. That means we eliminate the four major causes of itching, irritation and inflammation. It can be also irritable gut, sensitive skin, gassy/farty—it's not just stuck with itching. Pop them onto a hypoallergenic diet, and what we aim to achieve from this, with removing all the treats and things and feeding them the right type of food, is a result. One of three things will happen after three to four weeks on a hypoallergenic diet. 1. they will have a 100% improvement. We then know that they have a pure food allergy, and then we can work towards working out what that is. 2. they have some improvement, but not complete improvement. That means we're working with a dog that's got food and contact or environmental allergies. We then work down the food allergies, as well as supporting the immune system for the external, environmental or contact allergies. 3. there's no difference. That means we're not dealing with a food allergy; we're dealing with a pure contact or environmental allergy. So, by doing this testing, whatever happens out of the three options, it gives us the guideline as to what's causing the issues with the dog. Once we've achieved those results, we can work specifically with your dog to set up treatments and products and solutions that help their direct issues.

Recording 2

Q: My dog is itchy around the eyes, face, muzzle and ears. Could this be food-related?

A: Absolutely. It could be a food allergen. However, with that particular area of the body, it could also be contact or environmental. A lot of dogs will roll in grass and things like that that may set them off. So we would need to do a test on a hypoallergenic diet to assess whether it's food, contact or environmental first.

Recording 3

Q: My dog's itching gets worse in spring and summer, but clears up over winter. What does this mean?

A: It means your dog has potential contact or environmental allergens, such as grass, which grows really quickly with a lot of allergens in it, which causes a lot of the skin issues. Also, pollens come out during spring and summer—another issue for dogs: itchy eyes, goopy eyes. So, potentially contact and environmental, and the fact that they clear up over winter is quite indicative of a dog with seasonal contact allergies. We can help that with plenty of the products to support their immune system, as well as their skin microbiome.

Recording 4

Q: My dog has a yeasty smell and their skin gets worse in summer. What could be causing this?

A: There are a number of causes for yeast issues. The first is dogs with food or contact allergens get itchy. They then proceed to lick sensitive areas like their armpits or their paws. The saliva stays there, warms up and turns into a yeast infection. They then scratch their ear and transfer it from their foot to their ear, and vice versa. Yeast issues are a common problem in dogs. While food does not create yeast issues, we can use certain foods to help starve the yeast off. Also, another thing to do is support their immune system and gut health.

Recording 5

Q: My dog is licking their paws and rolling around a lot. What are the common causes?

A: We would need to do an assessment and just see if they're itchy all over their whole body, or if it's more their underbelly, undercarriage and under paws. That would differentiate between a potential food and contact, or just a contact allergy. Their skin is obviously itchy, and we need to relieve them either with diet alterations or with supplements to protect them and help them with their contact allergies and seasonal allergies.

Recording 6

Q: Even organic beef seems to cause my dog's allergies. Is that normal?

A: That's a great question. People think feeding organic beef or chicken will help alleviate any potential issues with food allergies. That's not the case, unfortunately. Dogs are allergic to the protein in the meat. So even if it's a fully hypoallergenic animal, they still will have an adverse reaction to the protein in the meat.

Recording 7

Q: My terrier has chronic itching. Are certain breeds more prone to allergies?

A: Absolutely. Terriers are specifically sensitive due to their coloration—normally largely white. In general, unfortunately, terriers tend to have food and/or contact allergies, especially with the latest fad of breeding dilute colours, like the blue dogs. It's a dilute gene to a dilute gene, so you end up with even more severe skin issues. So while there are many other breeds, like German Shepherds, Shar-Peis, etc., that have sensitive skin, terriers are certainly more prone to them.

Recording 8

Q: My dog has chronic skin issues—belly, groin, armpit, neck—and is now getting recurring ear infections. Could switching food help?

A: Absolutely. That dog sounds like it's got a potential food-contact—sorry, that dog had—can you restart it?

[Off-camera speaker: No, just keep going. I can edit it out.]

A: This dog sounds like it has contact allergens. It may have food allergens as well, but if it was a food allergen, I would expect itching all over the body. The fact that it's itching only on its underside, under its feet, under its armpits and its groin—that's generally where the hair is the thinnest and comes into the most contact with grass and sap, which makes the irritation worse. So, following on from the itching caused by the contact allergies, dogs lick the itchy bits. The warm saliva in between their feet generally turns into a yeast infection, which also gives off an orange and rusty tint sometimes and a bit of a funny smell. What happens then is the dog scratches their ear and passes the yeast infection into their ear, and it's a dance backwards and forwards trying to get on top of it. While food does not cause yeast issues, we can select certain types of food to starve the yeast off. Supporting their immune system through the contact and environmental allergies, and improved quality of food—we have plans to help your dog get way more comfortable and reduce the yeast issues.

Recording 9

Q: Is it okay to keep my dog on a topical itch spray alongside a prescribed allergy medication?

A: On the most part, yes. We certainly would want to double-check with certain medications, but we also have options where we would want to do a reassessment of the cause of the allergy. If we do that, we can generally end up getting dogs on lower doses of the medication or off of it entirely. So, yep, absolutely we can help, and hopefully we can reduce, if not remove, the need for the veterinary medication.

Recording 10

Q: How do I bathe my itchy dog without making it worse?

A: There are some vet-prescribed products like Malaseb, which help to soothe the animal's skin and coat. They work really well, but what happens is they actually strip off all the microbes off of the skin, and they're actually used in hospital theatres to sterilise equipment. So it does the same on your dog's body. Stripping the skin then forces the cells to rebuild and the flora to rebuild, and generally what grows back quickest is the bad stuff, not the good stuff. With bathing any dogs, we would recommend stuff that is gentle, natural and does not strip the skin. The WashBar range is amazing for this—gentle, keeping the skin antibacterial, antimicrobial and antifungal. Great options, and really gentle.

Recording 11

Q: My dog got sick after eating a smoked treat. Could the smoking process be the cause?

A: It absolutely could be a cause, but it's highly unlikely. The more likely event is that your dog is not necessarily used to different-flavoured treats, or has a sensitive tummy, causing nausea or vomiting. Eating grass and that is a common symptom of this. And also, the introduction of the treat might have been a bit too quick if they aren't used to certain proteins. So unlikely, but yes.

Recording 12

Q: What's a good hypoallergenic protein option if I need to buy in bulk for multiple dogs?

A: If you're aware of the cause, or the protein that causes the itching, we have many alternatives that are free from beef, for example, or free from chicken, or free from wheat, if you know what they are. Most people don't know what the allergens are, so first we would recommend going through stage one of testing your dog on a hypoallergenic diet to assess what the causes of itching are. The second option is the Natura Diet Itch Buster—best value for money out of all the options, including the vet-care options, which are really highly processed. The Natura Diet Itch Buster or the Natura Diet Grain Be Gone are both fully hypoallergenic products made in New Zealand out of wild-caught New Zealand fish. Phenomenal quality, and would be the best buy for your dogs. Once we've worked out their itching assessments, we then could offer cheaper alternatives, knowing what the actual issues are.

Recording 13

Q: My dog is a fussy eater and isn't taking to a new hypoallergenic food. What should I try?

A: There are generally many reasons for dogs to be fussy. The vet options are generally—hypoallergenic vet options are generally not hugely rich in flavour. You don't have options to get alternative flavours for them. In our range, however, we have multiple options for all different sizes and types of dogs. The hardest dogs to deal with are smart dogs, like German Shepherds and things like that, and small fluffies. They generally like to eat something for a week or a month and then want to change. We have many options, like the Natura Diet Itch Buster, the Natura Diet Grain Be Gone, or the Addiction range, and many of its flavours are completely hypoallergenic. Addiction, for small fluffy dogs that are really fussy, is brilliant: small biscuit sizes, all clean, really, really good, and you can swap between multiple flavours. Value for money, medium to large breeds, the Grain Be Gone and Itch Buster are phenomenal options.

Recording 14

Q: My dog has IBD and is limited to single-protein exotic meats. What should I know about ingredient changes?

A: For dogs with sensitivities and gut health, the first thing that I would work with is increasing their microflora and gut biome. Good probiotics and prebiotics are a start. The second thing is really gentle meats that help their issues go through. The second issue is really gentle meats. The top seller that we use for this would be, in all cases, the Natura Diet Itch Buster. Not only is it for itchy dogs—hypoallergenic—it's got the added benefit of being tested independently to universal standards for dogs with impaired gut health, gastrointestinal issues, impaired liver function, and dogs with or prone to pancreatitis. So the Natura Diet Itch Buster is a multifaceted product which deals directly with IBD.

Recording 15

Q: My dog is bored of eating the same food. What can I do to add variety without upsetting their stomach?

A: If they're on a hypoallergenic diet, anything on our website with a pinky-purple round circle behind is safe for your dogs. If they're on a sensitive diet or hypoallergenic diet, they don't have to be the poor dog that can't eat anything. We've taken the guesswork out of it for you and have full ranges of treats, raw food, tinned food, wet food and food toppers that are all suitable for dogs—normal dogs, as well as dogs with itching or skin issues, or food allergies, or sensitive tummies. So follow the colour coding on the website or in store on the barcodes, and you can get anything there for your dog so they can carry on having a joyful and tasteful life.

Recording 16

Q: Why might my dog get bored of a food after being on it for a while?

A: Same as humans, they have variable tastes. A lot of the smaller dogs tend to be really fussy because we treat them a little bit more like little people than we do dogs. So we feed them extra-special tidbits, we home-cook food for them and buy them the best of the best. They then lead to a bit more fussiness, and they're wanting better stuff in life, and they know if they hold out, mummy or daddy will give them something better. The second reason is that most dogs do like a bit of variety and change, so by adding a wet food, a topper, or alternating between appropriate options would be a really great option to keep it exciting and keep them interested. We have all of those options available.

Recording 17

Q: My dog has multiple food allergies. Are treats safe to give as well?

A: Absolutely. We've taken out the guesswork. Anything on our website with a pinky-purple circle background or pinky-purple barcode in store dictates a hypoallergenic option. We've taken out the four main causes, which are wheat, chicken, beef, and all the processing, colourings, flavourings and preservatives, and made all the options available for your dog.

Recording 18

Q: My dog has environmental sensitivities as well as food ones. What can help?

A: The first thing we would do for a dog with both environmental and food sensitivities is put them on a correctly balanced hypoallergenic diet. We then use supporting products for the environment, such as the BioPet grasses [unclear product name], WashBar Itch Soothe topical spray, to treat any itching and scratching areas and make them more comfortable—reduce inflammation. The third thing that we would do is pop them onto a microbiome prebiotic product to get their gut health on track. Improved gut health is directly related to the immune system, and while a good-quality food can improve the immune system, that also helps them deal better with the contact- or grass-related allergies. You'll never get rid of a grass allergy or a contact allergy, but we have many options to help lower the issue and reduce the discomfort.

Recording 19

Q: My dog has ongoing diarrhoea even after switching food. What should I check?

A: Diarrhoea is most often associated with poor gut microbiome. There's many reasons that dogs can have poor gut microbiomes: anaesthetic, steroids, prednisone, medication, stress—things like that strip the stomach lining. Stomach lining is the core of the main source for the immune system. The first thing that we would do is pop your dog onto a pre- or probiotic and get their gut health back in check. And the other thing we would do is put them onto a hypoallergenic food again to reduce the inflammation and the issues for the dog, and then slowly reintroduce new foods, working out and assessing what the causes are. No dog should have constant vomiting or diarrhoea, commonly believed by most people. We can resolve 99% of these issues permanently. Unless the dog has been diagnosed with a medical condition like IBD, there's no reason why a dog should vomit and have diarrhoea issues all their lives.

Recording 20

Q: Can a change in protein help firm up my dog's stool?

A: Absolutely. Different proteins—slightly richer proteins—might process a little bit more loosely in the dog's stool. However, what you can do as well is increase bone content. Bone content is a natural way to increase the density of the stool. If it's in regards to anal-gland issues, we have some amazing products as well. The OmegaFlex pumpkin powder is one that helps either firm stools when they're loose, or soften them when they've got constipation. That gives great help to the anal glands clearing and reduces issues there as well.

Recording 21

Q: My large-breed puppy is nine months old. Should I switch them to adult food now or wait?

A: In general, we want large-breed puppies on puppy food until at least 12 months. At the nine-month mark, they reach their general mature height, within a little bit of space. However, at that point they start putting on mass, bulk and increasing bone density, so it's really important to have increased calcium and protein in their diets. You could potentially move onto an adult food as long as it's really high in protein and fat, and you give them increased bone. It can be done. Best to have a chat.

Recording 22

Q: My puppy isn't very food-motivated and is slow to adjust to a new food. Is that normal?

A: Depending on the age of the pup, absolutely. While changes in a young pup's foods can cause them tummy upsets if done too quickly, it's really important to make nice, slow changes to them. Also, depending on the age of the pup and breed, some of them just aren't real big foodies. So as long as they're growing consistently along their growth trends and everything is healthy, there shouldn't be an issue with dogs that aren't too fussed on food. Some of them are just like that.

Recording 23

Q: I noticed my bag of food looks or smells slightly different from the last one. Is that a problem?

A: Due to the fact that we prefer to use natural products and natural food preservatives, there can be a slight variation in the colour and smell of the food. We also use seasonal fish and things like that that can give variance in colour. The fresh food is generally all good in slight tone variations and substance.

Recording 24

Q: Is it cheaper to buy dog food in bulk?

A: If you're a kennel, breeder, doggy day care, or similar wanting bulk stock, we can certainly help with that. However, if you're an individual or private person wanting to buy bulk dog food for your own pets, we have really great pricing.

Recording 25

Q: My dog is overweight for their breed. What kind of food change can help?

A: The general reasons are as simple as calories in, calories out. Certain breeds have slower metabolisms, some dogs fatten up after desexing. The main reason, however, is we generally tend to overfeed them from little snacks and tid-bits throughout the day. They all add up, and we end up giving them more caloric input than exercise output. Most of the time it's just a reduction in quantity. Bigger biscuits help them slow down, make them realise that they've eaten, and have a more satiated meal than small meals that they gulp down really, really quickly. We have foods that are low in fat and perfect for this option, as well as products that are really low in fat and treats. So they don't have to go on a full diet, but they've just got to select the right proteins.

Recording 26

Q: How many treats or treat sticks can I give without overdoing calories?

A: The important thing to remember is that with our treats, we focus on natural and clean, so they're actually generally protein substitutes. If you're feeding a slightly higher amount of treats, then I would certainly reduce the amount of food, because the treats are also nutritionally beneficial for your dogs. However, feeding too many treats can give them a reduced overall balanced diet, so keeping a good-quality raw or kibble base is the priority, with treats just being a top-up and an enjoyment.

Recording 27

Q: What's the difference between a grain-free and a wheat-free hypoallergenic food?

A: The simple difference is that ten-odd years ago there was a marketing trend for grain-free being the new kid on the block. Very big marketing, very big promotional banners to create a new drive. The truth of that is that most dogs are not allergic to grains. Grains are not the issue. 99.9% of dogs with food issues or allergies are allergic to wheat. So wheat is the option that we want to go with, not necessarily grain-free. Grain-free is slightly cleaner, but wheat-free is the necessity. The only real consideration to this rule—in a very small percentage of dogs—may be allergies to grains, where a grain-free diet is needed. However, the main reason for going onto a grain-free diet is actually to starve off yeast issues. While food doesn't cause yeast, it helps feed it by breaking down into sugars. Grain-free breaks down into lower sugar amounts and effectively helps starve off the yeast. So: grain-free for dogs with yeasty issues, and wheat-free for normal dogs with allergy issues.
